The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Malcolm X


Malcolm’s exposition of his social ideas was clear and thoughtful, if somewhat shocking to the white initiate, but most disconcerting in our talk was Malcolm’s belief in Elijah Muhammad’s history of the origins of man, and in a genetic theory devised to prove the superiority of black over white—a theory stunning to me in its sheer absurdity.<hr>
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, loc. 101-104<hr>


It has always been my belief that I, too, will die by violence. I have done all that I can to be prepared.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 4, loc. 173-173<hr>


What I am trying to say is that it just never dawned upon them that I could understand, that I wasn’t a pet, but a human being. They didn’t give me credit for having the same sensitivity, intellect, and understanding that they would have been ready and willing to recognize in a white boy in my position.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 32, loc. 603-605<hr>


All women, by their nature, are fragile and weak: they are attracted to the male in whom they see strength.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 108, loc. 1737-1738<hr>


Most whites don’t give a Negro credit for having sense enough to fool them—or nerve enough.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 119, loc. 1918-1919<hr>


Negroes are so busy trying to impress on the white man that they are “different from those others” that they can’t see they are only helping the white man to keep his low opinion of all Negroes.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 123, loc. 1975-1977<hr>


Everything was building up, closing in on me. I was trapped in so many cross turns. West Indian Archie gunning for me. The Italians who thought I’d stuck up their crap game after me. The scared kid hustler I’d hit. The cops. For four years, up to that point, I’d been lucky enough, or slick enough, to escape jail, or even getting arrested. Or any serious trouble. But I knew that any minute now something had to give.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 153, loc. 2411-2414<hr>


It seems that some women love to be exploited. When they are not exploited, they exploit the man.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 156, loc. 2448-2449<hr>


Looking back, I think I really was at least slightly out of my mind. I viewed narcotics as most people regard food. I wore my guns as today I wear my neckties. Deep down, I actually believed that after living as fully as humanly possible, one should then die violently. I expected then, as I still expect today, to die at any time. But then, I think I deliberately invited death in many, sometimes insane, ways.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 159, loc. 2498-2502<hr>


And, if you ask me today, I’ll tell you that tobacco, in all its forms, is just as much an addiction as any narcotic.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 161, loc. 2522-2523<hr>


All of a sudden, I pulled out my gun, shook out all five bullets, and then let them see me put back only one bullet. I twirled the cylinder, and put the muzzle to my head. “Now, I’m going to see how much guts all of you have,” I said. I grinned at them. All of their mouths had flapped open. I pulled the trigger—we all heard it click. “I’m going to do it again, now.” They begged me to stop. I could see in Shorty’s and Rudy’s eyes some idea of rushing me. We all heard the hammer click on another empty cylinder. The women were in hysterics. Rudy and Shorty were begging, “Man…Red…cut it out, man!…Freeze!” I pulled the trigger once more. “I’m doing this, showing you I’m not afraid to die,” I told them. “Never cross a man not afraid to die…now, let’s get to work!”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 165, loc. 2582-2590<hr>


Drugs helped me push the thought to the back of my mind. They were the center of my life. I had gotten to the stage where every day I used enough drugs—reefers, cocaine, or both—so that I felt above any worries, any strains.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 169, loc. 2650-2652<hr>


Even the court clerks and the bailiffs: “Nice white girls…goddam niggers—” It was the same even from our court-appointed lawyers as we sat down, under guard, at a table, as our hearing assembled. Before the judge entered, I said to one lawyer, “We seem to be getting sentenced because of those girls.” He got red from the neck up and shuffled his papers: “You had no business with white girls!”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 173, loc. 2710-2713<hr>


want to say before I go on that I have never previously told anyone my sordid past in detail. I haven’t done it now to sound as though I might be proud of how bad, how evil, I was.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 173, loc. 2715-2717<hr>


I first got high in Charlestown on nutmeg. My cellmate was among at least a hundred nutmeg men who, for money or cigarettes, bought from kitchen-worker inmates penny matchboxes full of stolen nutmeg. I grabbed a box as though it were a pound of heavy drugs. Stirred into a glass of cold water, a penny matchbox full of nutmeg had the kick of three or four reefers.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 177, loc. 2755-2758<hr>


Ella had been steadily working to get me transferred to the Norfolk, Massachusetts, Prison Colony, which was an experimental rehabilitation jail.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 181, loc. 2826-2827<hr>


and there had met a Mr. Wallace D. Fard who he claimed was “God in person.” Mr. Wallace D. Fard had given to Elijah Muhammad Allah’s message for the black people who were “the Lost-Found Nation of Islam here in this wilderness of North America.”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 187, loc. 2910-2912<hr>


And where the religion of every other people on earth taught its believers of a God with whom they could identify, a God who at least looked like one of their own kind, the slavemaster injected his Christian religion into this “Negro.” This “Negro” was taught to worship an alien God having the same blond hair, pale skin, and blue eyes as the slavemaster.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 188, loc. 2932-2935<hr>


I was going through the hardest thing, also the greatest thing, for any human being to do; to accept that which is already within you, and around you.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 189, loc. 2954-2955<hr>


But then, when I was the personification of evil, I was going through it.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 196, loc. 3040-3040<hr>


Many who today hear me somewhere in person, or on television, or those who read something I’ve said, will think I went to school far beyond the eighth grade. This impression is due entirely to my prison studies.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 198, loc. 3067-3069<hr>


I can remember accurately the very first set of books that really impressed me. I have since bought that set of books and have it at home for my children to read as they grow up. It’s called Wonders of the World. It’s full of pictures of archeological finds, statues that depict, usually, non-European people.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 201, loc. 3124-3126<hr>


Reading it over and over, especially certain sections, helped me to understand that if you started with a black man, a white man could be produced; but starting with a white man, you never could produce a black man—because the white gene is recessive. And since no one disputes that there was but one Original Man, the conclusion is clear.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 202, loc. 3134-3136<hr>


The first Opium War was promptly declared by the white man. Imagine! Declaring war upon someone who objects to being narcotized! The Chinese were severely beaten, with Chinese-invented gunpowder. The Treaty of Nanking made China pay the British white man for the destroyed opium; forced open China’s major ports to British trade; forced China to abandon Hong Kong; fixed China’s import tariffs so low that cheap British articles soon flooded in, maiming China’s industrial development.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 205, loc. 3180-3184<hr>


An African elephant can’t stumble without falling on some white man with a shovel. Practically every week, we read about some great new find from Africa’s lost civilizations.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 209, loc. 3242-3243<hr>


Reginald is in an institution now. I know where, but I won’t say. I would not want to cause him any more trouble than he has already had. I believe, today, that it was written, it was meant, for Reginald to be used for one purpose only: as a bait, as a minnow to reach into the ocean of blackness where I was, to save me. I cannot understand it any other way.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 217, loc. 3373-3376<hr>


Each family member, even children upon meeting each other for that new day’s first time, greeted softly and pleasantly, “As-Salaam-Alaikum” (the Arabic for “Peace be unto you”). “Wa-Alaikum-Salaam” (“and unto you be peace”) was the other’s reply. Over and over again, the Muslim said in his own mind, “Allahu-Akbar, Allahu-Akbar” (“Allah is the greatest”).
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 223, loc. 3452-3455<hr>


Elijah Muhammad spoke of how the black man was Original Man, who had been kidnapped from his homeland and stripped of his language, his culture, his family structure, his family name, until the black man in America did not even realize who he
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 227, loc. 3512-3514<hr>


Elijah Muhammad spoke of how the black man was Original Man, who had been kidnapped from his homeland and stripped of his language, his culture, his family structure, his family name, until the black man in America did not even realize who he was.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 227, loc. 3512-3514<hr>


Elijah Muhammad spoke of how the black man was Original Man, who had been kidnapped from his homeland and stripped of his language, his culture, his family structure, his family name, until the black man in America did not even realize who he was. He told us, and showed us, how his teachings
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 227, loc. 3512-3515<hr>


I had more faith in Elijah Muhammad than I could ever have in any other man upon this earth.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 228, loc. 3528-3529<hr>


The Muslim’s “X” symbolized the true African family name that he never could know. For me, my “X” replaced the white slavemaster name of “Little” which some blue-eyed devil named Little had imposed upon my paternal forebears. The receipt of my “X” meant that forever after in the nation of Islam, I would be known as Malcolm X. Mr. Muhammad taught that we would keep this “X” until God Himself returned and gave us a Holy Name from His own mouth.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 229, loc. 3547-3551<hr>


Mr. W. D. Fard taught that the Negroes in America were directly descended from Muslims. He taught that Negroes in America were Lost Sheep, lost for four hundred years from the Nation of Islam, and that he, Mr. Fard, had come to redeem and return the Negro to his true religion.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 238, loc. 3694-3696<hr>


Now, Islam has very strict laws and teachings about women, the core of them being that the true nature of man is to be strong, and a woman’s true nature is to be weak, and while a man must at all times respect his woman, at the same time he needs to understand that he must control her if he expects to get her respect.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 260, loc. 4017-4019<hr>


skull. (After that operation, the Nation of Islam helped him to sue; a jury awarded him over $70,000, the largest police brutality judgment that New York City has ever paid.)
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 270, loc. 4175-4177<hr>


In late 1959, the television program was aired. “The Hate That Hate Produced”—the title—was edited tightly into a kaleidoscope of “shocker” images…
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 273, loc. 4222-4223<hr>


One funny thing—in all that hectic period, something quickly struck my notice: the Europeans never pressed the “hate” question. Only the American white man was so plagued and obsessed with being “hated.”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 276, loc. 4263-4264<hr>


“For the white man to ask the black man if he hates him is just like the rapist asking the raped, or the wolf asking the sheep, ‘Do you hate me?’ The white man is in no moral position to accuse anyone else of hate!
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 277, loc. 4276-4278<hr>


“Today’s Uncle Tom doesn’t wear a handkerchief on his head. This modern, twentieth-century Uncle Thomas now often wears a top hat. He’s usually well-dressed and well-educated. He’s often the personification of culture and refinement. The twentieth-century Uncle Thomas sometimes speaks with a Yale or Harvard accent. Sometimes he is known as Professor, Doctor, Judge, and Reverend, even Right Reverend Doctor. This twentieth-century Uncle Thomas is a professional Negro…by that I mean his profession is being a Negro for the white man.”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 279, loc. 4319-4324<hr>


To segregate means to control. Segregation is that which is forced upon inferiors by superiors. But separation is that which is done voluntarily, by two equals—for the good of both! The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that as long as our people here in America are dependent upon the white man, we will always be begging him for jobs, food, clothing, and housing.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 283, loc. 4373-4376<hr>


thousand ways every day, the white man is telling you ‘You can’t live here, you can’t enter here, you can’t eat here, drink here, walk here, work here, you can’t ride here, you can’t play here, you can’t study here.’ Haven’t we yet seen enough to see that he has no plan to unite with you?
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 292, loc. 4520-4523<hr>


“The white man would love to support Mr. Elijah Muhammad. Because if Mr. Muhammad had to rely on his support, he could advise Mr. Muhammad. My black brothers and sisters, it is only because your money, black money, supports Mr. Muhammad, that he can hold these all-black meetings from city to city,
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 295, loc. 4570-4573<hr>


If some white man, or “approved” black man, created a narcotics cure program as successful as the one conducted under the aegis of the Muslims, why, there would be government subsidy, and praise and spotlights, and headlines. But we were attacked instead
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 301, loc. 4665-4667<hr>


Or I might say, “No one will ever know exactly what emotional ingredient made this relatively trivial incident a fuse for those Montgomery Negroes. There had been centuries of the worst kind of outrages against Southern black people—lynchings, rapings, shootings, beatings! But you know history has been triggered by trivial-seeming incidents. Once a little nobody Indian lawyer was put off a train, and fed up with injustice, he twisted a knot in the British Lion’s tail. His name was Mahatma Gandhi!”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 310, loc. 4791-4795<hr>


to him. Why do I say this? Because all this has steadily helped this American white man to build up, deep in his psyche, absolute conviction that he is “superior.” In how many, many communities have, thus, white men who didn’t finish high school regarded condescendingly university-educated local Negro “leaders,” principals of schools, teachers, doctors, other professionals?
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 315, loc. 4880-4883<hr>


The American black man should be focusing his every effort toward building his own businesses, and decent homes for himself. As other ethnic groups have done, let the black people, wherever possible, however possible, patronize their own kind, hire their own kind, and start in those ways to build up the black race’s ability to do for itself. That’s the only way
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 317, loc. 4901-4904<hr>


The American black man should be focusing his every effort toward building his own businesses, and decent homes for himself. As other ethnic groups have done, let the black people, wherever possible, however possible, patronize their own kind, hire their own kind, and start in those ways to build up the black race’s ability to do for itself. That’s the only way the American black man is ever going to get respect
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 317, loc. 4901-4904<hr>


I’m right with the Southern white man who believes that you can’t have so-called “integration,” at least not for long, without intermarriage increasing. And what good is this for anyone? Let’s again face reality. In a world as color-hostile as this, man or woman, black or white, what do they want with a mate of the other race?
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 318, loc. 4916-4918<hr>


“Integration” is called “assimilation” if white ethnic groups alone are involved: it’s fought against tooth and nail by those who want their heritage preserved. Look at how the Irish threw the English out of Ireland. The Irish knew the English would engulf them. Look at the French-Canadians, fanatically fighting to keep their identity.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 319, loc. 4933-4936<hr>


ran two to four hours—they often ran overtime. Challenges, queries, and criticisms were fired at me by the usually objective and always alive and searching minds of undergraduate and graduate students, and their faculties.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 324, loc. 5022-5024<hr>


ran two to four hours—they often ran overtime. Challenges, queries, and criticisms were fired at me by the usually objective and always alive and searching minds of undergraduate and graduate students, and their faculties. The college sessions never failed to be exhilarating. They never failed in helping me to further my own education.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 324, loc. 5022-5025<hr>


I’ve talked with other public speakers; they agree that this ability is native to any person who has the “mass appeal” gift, who can get through to and move people. It’s a psychic radar. As a doctor, with his finger against a pulse, is able to feel the heart rate, when I am up there speaking, I can feel the reaction to what I am saying.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 325, loc. 5033-5035<hr>


One particular university’s “token-integrated” black Ph.D. associate professor I never will forget; he got me so
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 327, loc. 5062-5063<hr>


One particular university’s “token-integrated” black Ph.D. associate professor I never will forget; he got me so mad I couldn’t see straight.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 327, loc. 5062-5063<hr>


“And we see again that not ideologies, but race, and color, is what binds human beings. Is it accidental that as Red Chinese visit African and Asian countries, Russia and America draw steadily closer to each other?
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 328, loc. 5085-5087<hr>


Audiences seemed surprised when I spoke about Jesus. I would explain that we Muslims believe in the Prophet Jesus. He was one of the three most important Prophets of the religion of Islam, the others being Muhammad and Moses.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 329, loc. 5091-5093<hr>


Standing there by that Harvard window, I silently vowed to Allah that I never would forget that any wings I wore had been put on by the religion of Islam. That fact I never have forgotten…not for one second.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 331, loc. 5124-5126<hr>


To us, the Nation of Islam was Mr. Muhammad.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 332, loc. 5136-5136<hr>


state. I looked up, and I talked with three of the former secretaries to Mr. Muhammad. From their own mouths, I heard their stories of who had fathered their children. And from their own mouths I heard that Elijah Muhammad had told them I was the best, the greatest minister he ever had, but that someday I would leave him, turn against him—so I was “dangerous.”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 342, loc. 5292-5295<hr>


In fact, Elijah Muhammad instructed us Muslims against all forms of sports.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 350, loc. 5407-5408<hr>


“No one man should have that much power.”)
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 357, loc. 5520-5520<hr>


“Republican,” a black “Conservative,” or a black “Liberal”…when a ten-million black vote bloc could be the deciding balance of power in American politics, because the white man’s vote is almost always evenly divided.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 361, loc. 5588-5589<hr>


thought about Ella the whole flight back to New York. A strong woman. She had broken the spirits of three husbands, more driving and dynamic than all of them combined. She had played a very significant role in my life. No other woman ever was strong enough to point me in directions; I pointed women in directions. I had brought Ella into Islam, and now she was financing me to Mecca.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 367, loc. 5679-5682<hr>


was when I first began to reappraise the “white man.” It was when I first began to perceive that “white man,” as commonly used, means complexion only secondarily; primarily it described attitudes and actions. In America, “white man” meant specific attitudes and actions toward the black man, and toward all other non-white men.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 383, loc. 5928-5930<hr>


It was when I first began to perceive that “white man,” as commonly used, means complexion only secondarily; primarily it described attitudes and actions. In America, “white man” meant specific attitudes and actions toward the black man, and toward all other non-white men.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 383, loc. 5928-5930<hr>


That morning was the start of a radical alteration in my whole outlook about “white” men.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 383, loc. 5931-5932<hr>


He also pointed out how color, the complexities of color, and the problems of color which exist in the Muslim world, exist only where, and to the extent that, that area of the Muslim world has been influenced by the West. He said that if one encountered any differences based on attitude toward color, this directly reflected the degree of Western influence.”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 385, loc. 5954-5957<hr>


I tucked it into my mind that when I returned home I would tell Americans this observation; that where true brotherhood existed among all colors, where no one felt segregated, where there was no “superiority” complex, no “inferiority” complex—then voluntarily, naturally, people of the same kind felt drawn together by that which they had in common.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 395, loc. 6103-6106<hr>


alternative except to beg for his so-called “civil rights.” I said that the American black man needed to recognize that he had a strong, airtight case to take the United States before the United Nations on a formal accusation of “denial of human rights”—and that if Angola and South Africa were precedent cases, then there would be no easy way that the U.S. could escape being censured, right on its own home ground.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 415, loc. 6410-6413<hr>


I said that the American black man needed to recognize that he had a strong, airtight case to take the United States before the United Nations on a formal accusation of “denial of human rights”—and that if Angola and South Africa were precedent cases, then there would be no easy way that the U.S. could escape being censured, right on its own home ground.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 415, loc. 6410-6413<hr>


“In the past, yes, I have made sweeping indictments of all white people. I never will be guilty of that again—as I know now that some white people are truly sincere, that some truly are capable of being brotherly toward a black man. The true Islam has shown me that a blanket indictment of all white people is as wrong as when whites make blanket indictments against blacks.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 416, loc. 6425-6428<hr>


“Yes, I have been convinced that some American whites do want to help cure the rampant racism which is on the path to destroying this country!
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 416, loc. 6428-6430<hr>


“Our nation was born in genocide when it embraced the doctrine that the original American, the Indian, was an inferior race. Even before there were large numbers of Negroes on our shores, the scar of racial hatred had already disfigured colonial society. From the sixteenth century forward, blood flowed in battles over racial supremacy. We are perhaps the only nation which tried as a matter of national policy to wipe out its indigenous population.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 423, loc. 6527-6530<hr>


I told him, “What you are telling me is that it isn’t the American white man who is a racist, but it’s the American political, economic, and social atmosphere that automatically nourishes a racist psychology in the white man.” He agreed.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 427, loc. 6583-6585<hr>


The first thing I tell them is
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 433, loc. 6675-6675<hr>


For the freedom of my 22 million black brothers and sisters here in America, I do believe that I have fought the best that I knew how, and the best that I could, with the shortcomings that I have had. I know that my shortcomings are many.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 437, loc. 6739-6741<hr>


Well, every day you see that woman you look her right in the eyes and tell her ‘I think you’re beautiful,’ and you watch what happens. The first day she may curse you out, the second day, too—but you watch, you keep on, after a while one day she’s going to start smiling just as soon as you come in sight.”
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 448, loc. 6902-6904<hr>


There was something about this man when he was in a room with people. He commanded the room, whoever else was present.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 456, loc. 7030-7030<hr>


I saw Malcolm X too many times exhilarated in after-lecture give-and-take with predominantly white student bodies at colleges and universities to ever believe that he nurtured at his core any blanket white-hatred.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 460, loc. 7090-7091<hr>


“You know this place here in this chapter where I told you how I put the pistol up to my head and kept pulling the trigger and scared them so when I was starting the burglary ring—well,” he paused, “I don’t know if I ought to tell you this or not, but I want to tell the truth.” He eyed me, speculatively. “I palmed the bullet.” We laughed together.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 478, loc. 7360-7362<hr>


From this, it would be fair to say that one month before his death, Malcolm had revised his views on intermarriage to the point where he regarded it as simply a personal matter.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 488, loc. 7515-7517<hr>


And Malcolm was free. No one who knew him before and after his trip to Mecca could doubt that he had completely abandoned racism, separatism, and hatred.
Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, pg. 526, loc. 8102-8103<hr>


